Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
cell structure and function. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin physiology with the cell. Give me an overview of the structure of a
typical human cell.
The human cell is a eukaryotic cell,
meaning it has a true membrane-bound nucleus and membrane-bound organelles,
which compartmentalise its functions.
It is bounded by the plasma membrane,
a lipid bilayer that separates the intracellular from the extracellular environment
and controls exchange. Within is the cytoplasm,
a gel-like cytosol containing the organelles and the cytoskeleton.
The nucleus holds the genetic material and directs protein synthesis.
The endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus synthesise,
process and package proteins and lipids. The mitochondria generate energy as
adenosine triphosphate. Lysosomes and peroxisomes handle degradation.
The cytoskeleton gives shape, allows movement and organises transport.
This compartmentalisation lets incompatible chemical processes proceed
simultaneously in separate spaces.
So the typical human cell is a compartmentalised eukaryotic cell,
bounded by a plasma membrane and containing a nucleus and specialised organelles —
endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, mitochondria and lysosomes — within a
cytoskeleton-organised cytoplasm, the compartmentalisation being the key to its
function.
Describe the nucleus and how genetic information is expressed.
The nucleus is the largest organelle,
bounded by a double-membrane nuclear envelope perforated by nuclear pores that
control the passage of molecules, and it contains the cell's genetic material as
deoxyribonucleic acid, organised with proteins into chromatin and, at division,
into chromosomes.
The nucleolus within it produces ribosomes.
Genetic information is expressed in two steps.
In transcription, within the nucleus,
the deoxyribonucleic acid sequence of a gene is copied into messenger ribonucleic
acid by the enzyme RNA polymerase.
The messenger ribonucleic acid then passes through the nuclear pores into the
cytoplasm.
In translation, at the ribosomes, the messenger sequence is read in triplets,
or codons, and the corresponding amino acids are assembled into a polypeptide
chain, which folds into a functional protein.
So the nucleus stores the genetic material as deoxyribonucleic acid and controls
its expression: transcription copies a gene into messenger ribonucleic acid in the
nucleus, and translation at the ribosomes reads this to assemble the protein — the
central pathway from gene to protein.
Describe the endoplasmic reticulum and its relevance to drug handling.
The endoplasmic reticulum is an extensive network of membranous tubules and sacs
continuous with the nuclear envelope, of two kinds.
The rough endoplasmic reticulum is studded with ribosomes and is the site of
synthesis of proteins destined for secretion, for membranes, or for lysosomes;
the newly made proteins enter its lumen for folding and modification.
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum, lacking ribosomes,
synthesises lipids and steroids, stores calcium — importantly in muscle as the
sarcoplasmic reticulum — and is the site of drug metabolism.
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum of the hepatocyte is rich in the cytochrome P450
enzyme system, which performs the oxidative phase-one metabolism of many drugs,
and it can proliferate on enzyme induction.
So the endoplasmic reticulum synthesises proteins on its rough portion and lipids
and steroids on its smooth portion, the smooth reticulum also storing calcium and,
crucially in the liver, housing the cytochrome P450 system that metabolises drugs —
directly relevant to anaesthetic pharmacology.
Describe the mitochondria and how they generate energy.
The mitochondria are the cell's powerhouses,
generating most of its energy as adenosine triphosphate.
Each has a smooth outer membrane and a folded inner membrane, whose folds,
the cristae, greatly increase its surface area, enclosing the matrix;
they contain their own deoxyribonucleic acid, inherited maternally.
They generate energy by oxidative phosphorylation.
The products of glucose and fatty-acid breakdown feed the citric acid cycle in the
matrix, producing reduced electron carriers.
These donate electrons to the electron transport chain on the inner membrane,
which pumps protons into the intermembrane space,
creating an electrochemical proton gradient — the physics of chemiosmosis.
The protons then flow back through the enzyme ATP synthase,
and this flow drives the synthesis of adenosine triphosphate.
So the mitochondria generate adenosine triphosphate by oxidative phosphorylation:
the electron transport chain on the cristae uses the energy of electrons to pump
protons, creating a gradient whose return flow through ATP synthase powers ATP
synthesis — a chemiosmotic mechanism central to cellular energy.
Describe the Golgi apparatus, lysosomes and peroxisomes.
These organelles handle the processing and degradation of cellular materials.
The Golgi apparatus is a stack of flattened membranous sacs that receives newly
synthesised proteins and lipids from the endoplasmic reticulum, then modifies,
sorts and packages them — for example adding carbohydrate groups — dispatching them
in vesicles to their destinations within or outside the cell.
The lysosomes are membrane-bound vesicles containing acidic digestive enzymes that
break down worn-out organelles, engulfed material and macromolecules,
the recycled products being reused;
their membrane protects the cell from these enzymes.
The peroxisomes contain oxidative enzymes that break down fatty acids and detoxify
substances, generating and then destroying hydrogen peroxide.
So the Golgi apparatus modifies, sorts and packages proteins and lipids for
delivery; the lysosomes are the cell's digestive and recycling system with acidic
enzymes; and the peroxisomes perform oxidative breakdown and detoxification —
together managing the processing, recycling and disposal of cellular materials.
How do cells communicate — outline cell signalling.
Cells communicate through chemical signals — hormones,
neurotransmitters and local mediators — that bind receptors on or in the target
cell, transducing the signal into a cellular response.
Receptors fall into types defined by their mechanism.
Ligand-gated ion channels open on binding to allow ions through,
giving the fastest responses, as at the neuromuscular junction.
G-protein-coupled receptors, the largest family,
activate intracellular G proteins that modulate enzymes or channels,
generating second messengers such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate,
inositol trisphosphate and calcium.
Enzyme-linked receptors, such as the tyrosine kinase receptor for insulin,
have intrinsic enzymatic activity. Intracellular receptors,
for lipophilic signals such as steroids,
bind in the cytoplasm or nucleus and alter gene transcription,
giving slow but sustained effects.
So cells communicate by chemical messengers acting on receptors — fast ligand-gated
ion channels, G-protein-coupled receptors working through second messengers,
enzyme-linked receptors, and intracellular receptors altering transcription — the
receptor type determining the speed and nature of the response,
a framework underlying much of pharmacology.
What is adenosine triphosphate and why is it central?
Adenosine triphosphate is the cell's universal energy currency,
the molecule through which energy released by the oxidation of fuels is captured,
transported and spent on cellular work.
It consists of adenosine bound to three phosphate groups,
the bonds between the phosphates being high-energy;
hydrolysis of the terminal bond to adenosine diphosphate and inorganic phosphate
releases readily usable energy.
This energy powers the cell's work: the active transport of ions,
as by the sodium-potassium pump; muscle contraction;
the synthesis of macromolecules; and secretion and movement.
Because it is continually consumed, it is continually regenerated,
chiefly by oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria,
with smaller amounts from glycolysis;
the body turns over its weight in adenosine triphosphate daily.
So adenosine triphosphate is the universal energy currency,
its high-energy phosphate bonds releasing usable energy on hydrolysis to drive
transport, contraction, synthesis and secretion,
continually regenerated by mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation — the central
link between energy production and cellular work.
Distinguish apoptosis from necrosis.
These are two modes of cell death with very different mechanisms and consequences.
Apoptosis is programmed cell death, an orderly, energy-dependent,
regulated process by which the cell deliberately dismantles itself — the cell
shrinks, its chromatin condenses, the deoxyribonucleic acid is cleaved,
and it breaks into membrane-bound apoptotic bodies that are neatly phagocytosed
without spilling their contents, so there is no inflammation.
It is essential in development, in tissue turnover and in removing damaged or
potentially malignant cells.
Necrosis, by contrast, is uncontrolled cell death from injury — such as ischaemia,
toxins or trauma — in which the cell swells and ruptures,
spilling its contents and provoking an inflammatory response in the surrounding
tissue.
So apoptosis is regulated, energy-dependent programmed cell death that is clean and
non-inflammatory, important in development and tissue homeostasis,
whereas necrosis is the disordered,
inflammatory cell death caused by injury — a fundamental distinction between the
cell's controlled self-elimination and its destruction by harm.
What is the relevance of cellular physiology to anaesthesia?
Cellular physiology underpins much of anaesthetic practice.
The plasma membrane and its ion channels are the targets of many anaesthetic and
analgesic drugs — local anaesthetics block sodium channels,
and general anaesthetics act on membrane proteins and ligand-gated channels such as
the GABA receptor.
The mitochondria are relevant to several conditions:
their impairment underlies propofol infusion syndrome,
and metabolic and lactic acidoses reflect failure of oxidative phosphorylation,
as in poor perfusion.
The sarcoplasmic reticulum and its calcium-release channel, the ryanodine receptor,
are central to malignant hyperthermia,
in which a receptor defect causes uncontrolled calcium release.
The cytochrome P450 system of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum governs drug
metabolism and interactions.
So cellular physiology is directly relevant to anaesthesia through the membrane and
ion channels as drug targets, the mitochondria in propofol infusion syndrome and
metabolic acidosis, the sarcoplasmic reticulum and ryanodine receptor in malignant
hyperthermia, and the cytochrome P450 system in drug metabolism — the cell being
where anaesthetic drugs and pathophysiology act.
Pull it together: how does cellular structure serve cellular function?
I would draw it together around the principle that the cell's compartmentalised
structure serves its functions. The plasma membrane establishes the boundary and
controls exchange and signalling.
The nucleus stores and expresses the genetic information that specifies the cell's
proteins, executed by transcription and translation through the ribosomes and
endoplasmic reticulum.
The endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi synthesise,
modify and dispatch proteins and lipids,
the smooth reticulum also metabolising drugs and storing calcium.
The mitochondria supply the energy, as adenosine triphosphate,
that powers all this work.
Lysosomes and peroxisomes recycle and detoxify,
the cytoskeleton organises and moves,
and receptors allow the cell to respond to its environment.
Each structure is matched to its task, and their integration sustains the cell.
So cellular structure serves function through compartmentalisation — membrane for
boundary and signalling, nucleus for information,
reticulum and Golgi for synthesis, mitochondria for energy,
and the rest for recycling, movement and response — a coherent system directly
relevant to anaesthetic pharmacology and pathophysiology.
Distinguish a eukaryotic from a prokaryotic cell.
The distinction is fundamental.
The eukaryotic cell, of which human cells are examples,
possesses a true nucleus — its genetic material enclosed within a membrane-bound
nuclear envelope — and a range of membrane-bound organelles such as mitochondria,
endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, which compartmentalise its functions;
it is generally larger and more complex,
with its deoxyribonucleic acid organised with proteins into chromosomes.
The prokaryotic cell, of which bacteria are the example,
has no true nucleus and no membrane-bound organelles,
its single circular deoxyribonucleic acid lying free in the cytoplasm;
it is smaller and simpler, with a cell wall,
and includes the bacteria relevant to infection.
This distinction is clinically useful:
many antimicrobials exploit features unique to the prokaryotic cell — the cell
wall, the different ribosome — to kill bacteria without harming human eukaryotic
cells.
So the eukaryotic cell has a membrane-bound nucleus and organelles and
compartmentalised function, whereas the prokaryotic bacterial cell lacks these,
with its DNA free in the cytoplasm — a difference exploited by antibiotics to
achieve selective toxicity.
Describe the cytoskeleton and its functions.
The cytoskeleton is a dynamic network of protein filaments throughout the cytoplasm
that gives the cell its shape and mechanical strength,
and organises its interior and its movements. It has three components.
The microfilaments, of actin, are the thinnest,
lying beneath the membrane to give shape and to drive cell movement,
shape change and, with myosin, contraction.
The intermediate filaments provide tensile strength,
anchoring structures and resisting mechanical stress.
The microtubules, the largest, of tubulin,
radiate from a central organising centre and form tracks along which motor proteins
transport organelles and vesicles — including the fast axonal transport along
nerves — and they form the mitotic spindle that separates chromosomes at cell
division, and the core of cilia.
So the cytoskeleton is a network of actin microfilaments for shape and movement,
intermediate filaments for tensile strength,
and microtubules for intracellular transport,
cell division and cilia — giving the cell structure while organising its internal
traffic and its mechanics.
Outline the cell cycle and cell division.
The cell cycle is the ordered sequence by which a cell grows and divides into two
daughter cells. It comprises interphase and the mitotic phase.
Interphase, the longest part, has three stages: the first gap phase of growth;
the synthesis phase, in which the deoxyribonucleic acid is replicated so that each
chromosome is duplicated; and the second gap phase of further growth and
preparation.
The mitotic phase is the division itself: mitosis,
in which the duplicated chromosomes are separated equally into two nuclei by the
spindle, followed by cytokinesis, the division of the cytoplasm into two cells.
The cycle is tightly regulated at checkpoints that ensure each step is completed
correctly before the next, preventing the propagation of damage;
loss of this control underlies cancer.
So the cell cycle runs through interphase — growth,
deoxyribonucleic acid replication and preparation — then mitosis and cytokinesis to
produce two daughter cells, governed by checkpoints that safeguard fidelity,
the failure of which underlies malignancy.
Describe the second-messenger systems in more detail.
Second messengers are intracellular signalling molecules generated when an
extracellular messenger binds a surface receptor,
relaying and amplifying the signal within the cell,
chiefly downstream of G-protein-coupled receptors.
The cyclic adenosine monophosphate system:
the receptor activates a G protein that stimulates or inhibits adenylate cyclase,
changing cyclic adenosine monophosphate,
which activates protein kinase A to phosphorylate target proteins — the pathway of
many adrenergic and hormonal effects.
The phosphoinositide system: the receptor activates phospholipase C,
generating inositol trisphosphate, which releases calcium from intracellular
stores, and diacylglycerol, which activates protein kinase C.
Calcium itself acts as a ubiquitous second messenger,
binding proteins such as calmodulin. These systems allow amplification,
integration and modulation.
So second messengers — cyclic adenosine monophosphate acting through protein kinase
A, the inositol-trisphosphate and diacylglycerol system releasing calcium and
activating protein kinase C, and calcium itself — relay and amplify signals from
surface receptors inside the cell, the basis of much hormone and drug action.
Why are the intracellular and extracellular ionic compositions so different,
and why does it matter?
The intracellular and extracellular fluids differ markedly in ionic composition,
and this difference is actively maintained and physiologically essential.
The extracellular fluid is rich in sodium and chloride, with a lower potassium,
resembling a dilute seawater; the intracellular fluid is rich in potassium and in
organic phosphates and proteins, with a low sodium and very low free calcium.
These gradients are established and maintained by membrane pumps,
principally the sodium-potassium pump,
against the constant tendency of ions to leak down their gradients,
at considerable energy cost.
The gradients matter because they store potential energy that the cell uses:
the sodium and potassium gradients underlie the resting membrane potential and
excitability and power secondary active transport;
the steep calcium gradient allows calcium to act as a rapid intracellular signal.
So the intracellular and extracellular ionic compositions differ — potassium high
inside, sodium and calcium high outside — actively maintained by pumps,
because these gradients store the energy underlying excitability,
transport and calcium signalling, making their maintenance essential and
energy-costly.
What is the significance of mitochondrial DNA and mitochondrial disease?
The mitochondria are unusual in possessing their own small, circular genome,
a relic of their bacterial origin, which encodes some of the proteins of the
electron transport chain, the rest being encoded by the nuclear DNA.
This mitochondrial DNA is inherited almost entirely from the mother,
through the egg, so mitochondrial traits and diseases show maternal inheritance.
Because it lacks the protective and repair mechanisms of nuclear DNA and lies near
the reactive oxygen species generated by respiration, it accumulates mutations,
contributing to ageing.
Mitochondrial diseases, from mutations in mitochondrial or nuclear DNA,
impair energy production and affect the most energy-dependent tissues — nerve,
muscle, heart — and have anaesthetic implications,
with sensitivity to the metabolic stress of surgery and to certain agents.
So mitochondrial DNA is a small maternally inherited genome encoding
respiratory-chain components, prone to mutation,
the basis of maternally inherited mitochondrial diseases that impair energy
production in nerve, muscle and heart and carry anaesthetic implications — a
distinctive feature of these organelles.
How do free radicals damage cells, and how are they countered?
Free radicals, including the reactive oxygen species,
are highly reactive molecules with an unpaired electron,
generated as by-products of normal metabolism — particularly in the mitochondrial
electron transport chain — and in greater amounts in inflammation,
ischaemia-reperfusion and toxic exposure.
Being highly reactive, they damage cellular components:
they peroxidise membrane lipids, damage proteins and enzymes,
and cause mutations in deoxyribonucleic acid, contributing to cell injury,
ageing and disease.
The cell counters them with antioxidant defences:
enzymes such as superoxide dismutase,
catalase and glutathione peroxidase that neutralise reactive species,
and antioxidant molecules such as glutathione and vitamins C and E.
Oxidative stress is the imbalance when radical production exceeds these defences,
relevant in ischaemia-reperfusion injury and critical illness.
So free radicals, generated by metabolism and amplified in ischaemia-reperfusion
and inflammation, damage lipids, proteins and deoxyribonucleic acid,
countered by antioxidant enzymes and molecules;
their excess — oxidative stress — contributes to cell injury and is relevant to
reperfusion injury and critical illness.
How does temperature affect cellular and enzymatic processes?
Cellular processes are largely enzyme-catalysed chemical reactions,
whose rates are temperature-dependent,
described by the principle that reaction rate rises with temperature — quantified
physiologically by the temperature coefficient, the Q-ten,
the factor by which a rate changes for a ten-degree change in temperature,
typically around two to three for biological reactions,
meaning the rate roughly doubles or triples per ten degrees.
This underlies the rise in metabolic rate and oxygen consumption with fever and
their fall with hypothermia, the basis of the protection that therapeutic
hypothermia confers by reducing metabolic demand,
as in cardiac and neuro-protection.
However, enzymes are proteins, so beyond an optimum temperature they denature and
lose function, and excessive cooling slows all processes.
So cellular enzymatic processes are temperature-dependent,
their rate changing by a Q-ten factor of about two to three per ten degrees,
so metabolism rises with fever and falls with hypothermia — the basis of
hypothermic metabolic protection — while excessive heat denatures enzymes;
a physical principle with direct anaesthetic relevance to temperature management.
Describe the role of intracellular calcium as a signal.
Calcium serves as a near-universal intracellular signalling ion,
uniquely suited to the role because its free concentration in the cytoplasm is kept
extremely low at rest — some ten thousand times lower than outside — by pumps that
extrude it across the membrane and sequester it in the endoplasmic and sarcoplasmic
reticulum.
This steep gradient means that opening calcium channels,
in the membrane or in the internal stores, causes a rapid,
large rise in cytoplasmic calcium that acts as a signal.
Calcium then binds effector proteins — calmodulin,
troponin and others — to trigger responses: muscle contraction,
the release of neurotransmitters and hormones by exocytosis,
and the regulation of enzymes and gene expression.
The signal is terminated by pumping the calcium back out or into stores.
So intracellular calcium is a universal signal because its resting concentration is
kept very low, so that its controlled release produces a sharp rise that binds
effector proteins to trigger contraction,
secretion and enzyme regulation — a versatile messenger central to
excitation-contraction and excitation-secretion coupling.
Summarise how the cell maintains homeostasis of its internal environment.
The cell maintains a tightly controlled internal environment despite a changing
exterior, and this cellular homeostasis underlies the homeostasis of the whole body.
The plasma membrane is the gatekeeper,
its selective permeability and its array of channels,
carriers and pumps controlling what enters and leaves,
and maintaining the ionic gradients — high internal potassium,
low sodium and calcium — at energy cost.
The cell regulates its volume by controlling its solute content and so its water by
osmosis. It maintains its pH through buffers and transporters.
It controls its calcium very tightly for signalling.
It generates energy continuously to power these active processes.
And it responds to its environment through receptors and signalling.
Failure of these, as in energy depletion during ischaemia,
leads to loss of gradients, swelling and death.
So the cell maintains homeostasis through its selectively permeable membrane and
its pumps and transporters, controlling ionic composition, volume, pH and calcium,
all powered by continuous energy production — cellular homeostasis being the
foundation of whole-body homeostasis and failing when energy fails.
Describe protein synthesis, folding and the role of chaperones.
Protein synthesis turns the genetic code into functional proteins, in two stages.
In transcription, in the nucleus, a gene's deoxyribonucleic acid is copied into
messenger ribonucleic acid.
In translation, at the ribosome, the messenger is read in triplet codons,
each specifying an amino acid carried in by transfer ribonucleic acid,
and the amino acids are joined into a polypeptide chain.
Proteins for secretion or membranes are made on the rough endoplasmic reticulum,
entering its lumen.
The newly made chain must then fold into its precise three-dimensional shape to
function, and this folding is assisted and protected by chaperone proteins,
which prevent incorrect aggregation and refold or target for destruction misfolded
proteins.
Misfolding underlies diseases such as the prion and some neurodegenerative
disorders.
So protein synthesis proceeds by transcription of the gene into messenger
ribonucleic acid and its translation at the ribosome into a polypeptide,
which must then fold correctly — a process safeguarded by chaperones — the fidelity
of folding being as important as the sequence, and its failure causing disease.
Outline deoxyribonucleic acid replication and the consequences of mutation.
Deoxyribonucleic acid replication is the copying of the genome before cell
division, so that each daughter cell receives a complete copy.
It is semiconservative: the double helix unwinds and each strand serves as a
template against which a complementary new strand is synthesised by
deoxyribonucleic-acid polymerase, following the base-pairing rules,
so each new double helix has one old and one new strand.
The process is remarkably accurate,
with proofreading and repair mechanisms minimising errors.
A mutation is a change in the deoxyribonucleic-acid sequence,
arising from replication error or from damage by radiation,
chemicals or free radicals.
Mutations may be silent, or may alter a protein — with effects ranging from
harmless to causing inherited disease, or, by disrupting growth control,
contributing to cancer.
So deoxyribonucleic acid is replicated semiconservatively by polymerase using each
strand as a template, with proofreading for accuracy;
mutations — sequence changes from error or damage — may be silent or alter
proteins, underlying inherited disease and, through loss of growth control, cancer.
What are stem cells and cellular differentiation?
Differentiation is the process by which an unspecialised cell becomes a specialised
one — a neurone, a muscle cell, a hepatocyte — acquiring a distinct structure and
function.
Crucially, all the cells of the body carry the same genome,
so differentiation results not from changing the genes but from differential gene
expression: each cell type switches on the particular set of genes appropriate to
it and silences the others, directed by signals during development.
Stem cells are unspecialised cells that retain the capacity both to divide and to
differentiate into one or more specialised types.
They range from the totipotent and pluripotent cells of the embryo,
able to form any cell type, to the more restricted adult stem cells that maintain
and repair specific tissues, such as the haematopoietic stem cells of the marrow.
So differentiation is the acquisition of specialised structure and function through
differential expression of a shared genome,
and stem cells are the unspecialised cells that can both self-renew and
differentiate — from the pluripotent embryonic cells to the tissue-specific adult
stem cells underlying repair and renewal.
Give an overview of enzymes and cellular metabolism.
Enzymes are protein catalysts that accelerate the chemical reactions of the cell by
lowering their activation energy, without being consumed,
allowing reactions to proceed at body temperature at the rates life requires;
they are specific for their substrates and are regulated.
Cellular metabolism is the sum of these enzyme-catalysed reactions, of two kinds.
Catabolism breaks down fuel molecules — carbohydrates,
fats and proteins — releasing energy that is captured as adenosine triphosphate:
glucose, for instance, is broken down by glycolysis in the cytoplasm to pyruvate,
which enters the mitochondria for the citric acid cycle and oxidative
phosphorylation, yielding the bulk of the adenosine triphosphate.
Anabolism uses energy to build the cell's macromolecules.
Metabolism is regulated by controlling enzyme activity,
through allosteric effectors, hormones and gene expression.
So enzymes are regulated, specific protein catalysts that lower activation energy,
and metabolism is the integrated set of their reactions — catabolism releasing
energy as adenosine triphosphate, as in the breakdown of glucose,
and anabolism using it to build the cell — controlled by regulation of enzyme
activity.
Describe the glycocalyx and cell adhesion.
The glycocalyx is the carbohydrate-rich coat on the outer surface of the cell
membrane, formed by the sugar chains of glycoproteins and glycolipids projecting
outward.
It serves several functions: it protects the cell surface;
it carries the molecular markers for recognition,
including blood-group and tissue antigens,
allowing the immune system to distinguish self from non-self;
and it mediates cell adhesion and signalling.
Cell adhesion — binding of cells to one another and to the extracellular matrix —
is achieved by specific adhesion molecules,
such as the cadherins joining cells and the integrins anchoring cells to the
matrix, and by specialised junctions:
tight junctions sealing the space between cells to form barriers,
adherens junctions and desmosomes giving mechanical strength,
and gap junctions allowing direct communication.
The endothelial glycocalyx is increasingly recognised in vascular barrier function
and its disruption in critical illness.
So the glycocalyx is the cell's carbohydrate coat for protection,
recognition and adhesion, and cell adhesion is mediated by adhesion molecules and
junctions — tight, anchoring and gap junctions — organising cells into tissues,
with the endothelial glycocalyx important in vascular integrity.
How do cells regulate the number and sensitivity of their receptors?
Cells adjust their responsiveness to chemical signals by regulating their
receptors, an adaptive process important physiologically and in pharmacology.
In down-regulation, prolonged exposure to a high concentration of an agonist leads
the cell to reduce the number of receptors — by internalising and degrading them —
or to uncouple them, so the response diminishes;
this contributes to tolerance and to tachyphylaxis.
In up-regulation, prolonged lack of stimulation,
as by an antagonist or denervation, leads the cell to increase receptor number,
producing supersensitivity — as in the proliferation of acetylcholine receptors
after denervation or prolonged immobility,
which underlies the dangerous hyperkalaemic response to suxamethonium in such
patients.
Desensitisation is a faster, often reversible loss of response despite continued
agonist.
So cells regulate receptors by down-regulation — reducing receptor number with
sustained stimulation, causing tolerance — and up-regulation — increasing it with
understimulation or denervation, causing supersensitivity — adaptive changes of
direct anaesthetic relevance, notably the up-regulation that makes suxamethonium
hazardous after denervation or prolonged immobility.
Describe the mechanisms and consequences of cell injury.
Cells are injured when a harmful stimulus exceeds their adaptive capacity,
the commonest and most important cause in anaesthetic practice being a lack of
oxygen — hypoxia or ischaemia.
The central event is the failure of energy production: without oxygen,
oxidative phosphorylation fails, adenosine triphosphate falls,
and the energy-dependent processes that maintain the cell collapse.
The sodium-potassium pump fails, so sodium and water enter and the cell swells;
calcium accumulates in the cytoplasm, activating destructive enzymes;
anaerobic metabolism produces lactic acidosis; and free radicals are generated,
particularly on reperfusion.
If the injury is mild and brief, these changes are reversible;
if severe or prolonged, they become irreversible, with membrane breakdown,
and the cell dies by necrosis, or, in some circumstances, by apoptosis.
So cell injury, most importantly from hypoxia or ischaemia,
centres on the failure of energy production:
adenosine triphosphate depletion causes pump failure, swelling,
calcium accumulation, acidosis and free-radical damage — reversible if mild but
progressing to irreversible injury and cell death if severe — the basis of
ischaemic organ damage.
Summarise the cell as an integrated, energy-dependent system.
I would draw the cell together as an integrated system whose every function depends
ultimately on a continuous supply of energy.
Its compartmentalised structure separates and organises its tasks:
the membrane controls exchange and signalling,
the nucleus stores and expresses the genetic information through transcription and
translation, the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi synthesise and dispatch proteins
and lipids, and the cytoskeleton organises and moves.
All of this — the active transport that maintains the ionic gradients,
the synthesis of macromolecules, the contraction, the secretion,
the signalling — consumes adenosine triphosphate,
supplied chiefly by mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.
The cell maintains its internal environment, responds to signals, grows,
divides and, when appropriate, dies in an orderly way.
When energy supply fails, as in ischaemia, the whole system unravels.
So the cell is an integrated, compartmentalised,
energy-dependent system in which structure serves function and function depends on
continuous energy production — a unity whose failure, when energy fails,
underlies cellular injury and death,
and whose components are the targets of anaesthetic drugs and pathology.
Describe cellular respiration and the yield of adenosine triphosphate from glucose.
Cellular respiration is the controlled oxidation of fuel to capture energy as
adenosine triphosphate, and for glucose it proceeds in three linked stages.
First, glycolysis, in the cytoplasm, splits one glucose into two pyruvate,
yielding a small net amount of adenosine triphosphate and reduced electron
carriers, without oxygen.
Second, in the presence of oxygen, the pyruvate enters the mitochondria and is fed,
via acetyl-coenzyme A, into the citric acid cycle in the matrix,
which completes the oxidation and produces more reduced carriers and a little
adenosine triphosphate.
Third, these carriers donate electrons to the electron transport chain,
driving oxidative phosphorylation, which generates the great bulk of the adenosine
triphosphate.
In all, the complete aerobic oxidation of one glucose yields of the order of thirty
molecules of adenosine triphosphate, against only two from glycolysis alone.
So cellular respiration oxidises glucose through glycolysis,
the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation,
yielding around thirty adenosine triphosphate per glucose aerobically but only two
anaerobically — which is why oxygen is so vital and anaerobic metabolism so limited
and acidosis-prone.
Describe the extracellular matrix.
The extracellular matrix is the network of molecules secreted by cells that fills
the space between them, giving tissues their structure,
mechanical properties and a medium for signalling,
so that tissues are not merely collections of cells but cells embedded in this
organised material.
Its principal components are fibrous proteins and a hydrated ground substance.
Collagen, the most abundant protein in the body, provides tensile strength;
elastin provides elasticity, allowing tissues such as arteries and lung to recoil.
The ground substance, rich in proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans,
is highly hydrated, resisting compression and allowing diffusion.
Adhesive proteins such as fibronectin and laminin link cells to the matrix through
integrin receptors, anchoring them and transmitting signals that influence cell
behaviour.
So the extracellular matrix is the secreted network between cells — collagen for
tensile strength, elastin for recoil,
a hydrated proteoglycan ground substance resisting compression,
and adhesive proteins linking cells to it — providing tissue structure and
mechanics and a medium for cell anchorage and signalling.
What changes occur in cells with ageing?
Ageing is accompanied by progressive changes at the cellular level that reduce
functional reserve and underlie the vulnerability of the elderly,
of relevance to anaesthesia.
Cells accumulate damage over time: mutations and damage to deoxyribonucleic acid,
including the mitochondrial genome;
the accumulation of damaged proteins and pigments such as lipofuscin;
and oxidative damage from free radicals that the antioxidant defences increasingly
fail to contain.
Cells lose their capacity to divide — replicative senescence,
associated with the shortening of the protective chromosome ends, the telomeres.
Mitochondrial function declines, reducing energy production.
The net effect across tissues is a loss of functional reserve, slower repair,
and reduced ability to respond to stress,
so that the ageing patient tolerates the insults of surgery less well and handles
drugs differently.
So cellular ageing involves accumulated deoxyribonucleic-acid and protein damage,
oxidative injury, replicative senescence with telomere shortening,
and declining mitochondrial function — reducing functional reserve and the capacity
to respond to stress, the cellular basis of the reduced physiological reserve that
shapes anaesthesia in the elderly.
Thank you. A clear overview. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The human cell is a compartmentalised eukaryotic cell — plasma membrane,
nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, mitochondria,
lysosomes and cytoskeleton — the membrane-bound compartments allowing incompatible
processes to run simultaneously.
Second, Genetic information flows from gene to protein by transcription (DNA to
messenger RNA in the nucleus) and translation (read at the ribosomes);
the rough ER synthesises proteins and the smooth ER lipids and steroids,
stores calcium, and — in the liver — houses the cytochrome P450 drug-metabolising
system.
Third, Mitochondria generate ATP by oxidative phosphorylation:
the electron transport chain on the cristae pumps protons to create an
electrochemical gradient (chemiosmosis),
whose return flow through ATP synthase drives ATP synthesis;
ATP is the universal energy currency powering transport, contraction,
synthesis and secretion.
Fourth, Cells signal via receptors — fast ligand-gated ion channels,
G-protein-coupled receptors (second messengers: cyclic AMP, IP3, calcium),
enzyme-linked receptors, and intracellular receptors altering transcription — the
receptor type setting the speed and nature of the response;
apoptosis is clean programmed cell death, necrosis is inflammatory injury death.
Fifth, Cellular physiology underpins anaesthesia:
the membrane and ion channels are drug targets (local anaesthetics block sodium
channels; general anaesthetics act on GABA and other ligand-gated channels),
mitochondria feature in propofol infusion syndrome and metabolic acidosis,
the sarcoplasmic-reticulum ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia,
and cytochrome P450 in drug metabolism.
Thank you. That concludes the station.